Rreplace thread implementation with std thread from c++11 (#8)
LuxoftSDL/sdl_evolution: proposals/NNNN-replace-pthread-implementation-with-threads-from-cpp11.md

# Replace thread::Thread implementation with std::thread from C++11

* Proposal: [SDL-NNNN](NNNN-filename.md)
* Author: [SDL Developer](https://github.com/smartdevicelink)
* Status: **Awaiting review**
* Impacted Platforms: [Core]

## Introduction

> Replacing [pthreads](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/pthreads.7.html) with [std::thread](https://www.cplusplus.com/reference/thread/thread/) will make the code more platform-independent. That will simplify build, support and porting of the code to various platforms.

Reviewer: This proposal is called to...

## Motivation

> Currently we are using pthread library (in POSIX systems) for working with threads. It is a C library which does not consider some OOP aspects critical to C++ like an object lifetimes and exceptions handling.

Reviewer: The current implementation has...
>>It is a C library which does not consider some OOP aspects critical to C++ like an object lifetimes and exceptions handling.

re-write the advantages of the chosen approach

> Implementation of class-wrapper for working with threads used in sdl looks overloaded. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Implementation of class-wrapper for working with threads used in SDL Core looks overloaded. 
```

> There is can note that we had faced with the need to add some multithreaded code when porting SDL to Android, this would not have been necessary if using a standardized thread.

Reviewer: do not mention Android straight forward

C++11 standard library provides some classes, functions and primitives having a single interface for work with threads:
 - class thread as an abstraction for a thread of execution.
 - several classes and class templates for mutexes and locks, intending RAII2 to be used for their management and locking strategies, e.g., `std::recursive_mutex`, `std::timed_mutex`; `std::unique_lock`; `std::defer_lock`, `std::try_to_lock`.
 - function and class templates to create callable objects which are integrated into the thread facilities.
 - сondition variables (some uses of POSIX condition variables are better replaced by `std::future`).

>  - memory fence functions to for memory-ordering between operations.

Reviewer 2: memory fence functions for memory-ordering between operations.

>  - variadic templates (which enable the simple means of passing arguments to a thread function)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - variadic templates (that enable the simple means of passing arguments to a thread function)
```

>  - lambda expressions (anonymous closure objects), which can be used in place of functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - lambda expressions (anonymous closure objects), that can be used in place of functions.
```

 - rvalue references, which enable perfect forwarding to a thread function

> By replacing the thread code with the features listed above, we can make it simpler, more reliable, and portable.

Reviewer: To move up

## Proposed solution

> We could keep all functionality of the current implementation of multi-threaded code where it is required and at the same time be able to use the proposed standardized approach. For this the interface of Thread API will remain practically the same, with the exception of some methods:

Reviewer: It is possible to keep all functionality of the current implementation of multi-threaded code...
The proposed solution is not aimed to change

 - some of the methods should be made as virtual
 - type of field handle_ can be defined as a template parameter.
 - static methods of Thread class makes sense to move to ThreadManager.
 - also in ThreadManager could be moved functional from global functions `CreateThread()` and `DeleteThread()`

Below is an approximate class diagram for working with multithreaded code:

> ![GitHub Logo](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/LuxoftSDL/sdl_evolution/refactor/Replace_Thread_implementation_with_std_thread_fromC%2B%2B11/assets/proposals/Replace-Thread-implementation/threads_uml.png)

Reviewer: to remove

Reviewer: add an example of code 'before' and 'after' with a thread

> We could also remove from our thread.h this:

Reviewer: mind to remove

	#if defined(OS_POSIX)
	typedef pthread_t PlatformThreadHandle;
	#else
	#error Please implement thread for your OS
	#endif

When using standard C++11 threads, if in some place we need a system specific handler then we could use `std::thread::native_handle` which will give us an implementation-defined base thread descriptor.

Specifically, there is a suggestion to drop the Thread stack resizing functionality, because it's extremely rare to actually need a non-default stack-size.

> Based on the features listed in the Motivation section we can replace the contents of the files with c++11 facilities:

Reviewer: mind to remove (by adding the gist of this in the section above)

  - utils/callable.h
  - utils/conditional_variable.h
  - memory_barrier.h

> We can also refuse to use mutexes from the boost library, since it is as part of the standard library

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can also stop using mutexes from the boost library since it is a part of the standard library.
```

## Potential downsides

C++11 provides no equivalent to pthread_cancel(pthread_t thread).
As an option to resolve this issue we can add some `cancellation_token` to thread attributes which contains a sign that thread has cancelled.

Pthreads provides control over the size of the stack of created threads, C++11 does not address this issue.

> Most likely we can do without this functionality, but if not, then we can turn to `std::thread::native_handle` 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 `std::thread::native_handle` can be used if needed 
```

## Impact on existing code

> This proposal will impact SDL Core only.

Reviewer: The thread approach of SDL Core will be impacted.

## Alternatives considered

> Only leave the multithread code as it is.

Reviewer: to mention some libs (using native calls)

The main idea is to replace the 3rd party libraries and the list of wrappers for the thread management with the approaches defined in the C++ 11 standard. The mentioned changes shouldn't affect the functionality of the SDL Core, should improve portability in general, simplify the support of the project due to the standard approaches and minimize the list of dependencies.

## Proposed solution

As mentioned in the previous section, the changes introduced to the project shouldn't affect the functionality. It should mostly be done to replace the non-standard functionally, as in the example below.

The current implementation is represented with the current class UsbHandler:

```
class UsbHandler {
public:
  UsbHandler::UsbHandler() {
    thread_ = threads::CreateThread("UsbHandler", new UsbHandlerDelegate(this));
  }
	
private:

  void DoSomething() {...}

  class UsbHandlerDelegate : public threads::ThreadDelegate {
  public:
    void threadMain() {
      handler_->DoSomething();
    }
    void exitThreadMain() OVERRIDE;

  private:
    UsbHandler* handler_;
  };

  threads::Thread* thread_;
};
  ```

> As the result of the changes the same class should be changed to the class with the same functionality but with simpler structure (without delegate classes, raw pointers and complicated callbacks) and without any 3rd party dependencies:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As the result of the changes the same class should be changed to the class with the same functionality but with a simpler structure without delegate classes, raw pointers, complicated callbacks, and any 3rd party dependencies:
```
